The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chinese Opium-Smoker, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Chinese Opium-Smoker

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: November 25, 2018 [EBook #58350]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHINESE OPIUM-SMOKER ***




Produced by deaurider, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









  _Reproduced from the Chinese._]

  THE
  CHINESE OPIUM-SMOKER.

  TWELVE ILLUSTRATIONS

  Showing the Ruin
  which our Opium Trade with China is
  bringing upon that Country.

  LONDON:
  S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO., 9, PATERNOSTER ROW.

  PRICE SIXPENCE.




  CONTENTS.


  I.

  THE CHINESE OPIUM-SMOKER. TWELVE ILLUSTRATIONS.


  II.

  OPIUM-SMOKING IN CHINA COMPARED WITH THE DRINKING
  HABITS OF ENGLAND.


  III.

  THE EXTENT OF THE EVIL.


  IV.

  ENGLAND’S RESPONSIBILITY IN REGARD TO THE OPIUM-SMOKER.




I. THE CHINESE OPIUM-SMOKER.


  No. 1.

  The incipient opium-smoker is reclining (as is usual) on a couch in
  his mansion, while his companion is indulging in tobacco through the
  water-pipe common in China.

[Illustration]


  No. 2.

  The opium-smoker, still portly and well-dressed, is entreated by
  his poor wife on bended knees to desist from the disastrous habit.
  His child is running off with the dreaded pipe; while the aged
  grandmother is seen coming, leaning on her staff, to add her tears
  and entreaties--now for the first time proved to be powerless. The
  hold of the pipe is already established; interest, duty, affection,
  reputation--all prove too feeble to arrest the downward career of the
  smoker. Sad indeed is the prospect; the husband is already doomed to
  poverty, shame, and an early grave; his wife to ruin, his child to
  beggary. His mother will die of a broken heart.

[Illustration]


  No. 3.

  Representing the progress in dissipation of the once sober gentleman,
  who has now, alas! become the victim of this vice. To him day has
  now become night, and night day. He can no longer sleep at night;
  and to banish the tedium of its long quiet hours, and to drown
  thought of the sure ruin awaiting him, becomes an absolute necessity.
  Regardless, therefore, alike of entreaty and censure, he now openly
  introduces into his house singing men and women, and gives himself up
  to their society. His books, formerly the companions of his choice,
  now lie unheeded on his table, and will not long retain even their
  place there. As for his poor family, powerless to prevent, or even
  retard, the downward progress of events, they can only consult their
  own safety by keeping altogether out of sight.

[Illustration]


  No. 4.

  All trace of literary occupation is now gone: the opium scales have
  taken the place of the classics. In the foreground a servant is
  preparing extract of opium, for crude opium is never smoked. Before
  the portable stove stands a small bucket of water, and a little
  charcoal lies on the ground beside it. The opium is boiled in water,
  and filtered; and the dregs are again boiled, till all the soluble
  matter is extracted. The watery solutions are then boiled down to the
  consistency of treacle, when it is ready for use.

  At the table, by her husband, the wife of the smoker sits with
  pencil in hand, and with a long strip of paper before her. Now she
  needs to augment the family income. Happy is the wife who in these
  circumstances is able to execute Indian-ink drawings, or to write out
  ornamental quotations from the classics.

[Illustration]


  No. 5.

  Creditors will no longer forbear. Either the habit must at once and
  for ever be given up, or all hope of retaining possession of the
  ancestral property must be lost. The very graves of the ancestors
  join, as it were, in the last appeal of the weeping wife and mother,
  and of the weeping child, whose hopes of education, of literary
  advancement, and thus of promotion to office, are destroyed by the
  baneful narcotic.

  The aged mother, now needing the support of a staff, is bringing hot
  tea for her son. Will he bring down _her_ grey hairs with sorrow to
  the grave? Will he see her turned out, a homeless wanderer, out of
  the mansion in which she nursed and tended him when a helpless babe
  upon her lap?

[Illustration]


  No. 6.

  It is easy to imagine the feelings of the unfortunate wife, who,
  seeing the misery and wretchedness wrought in her once comfortable
  home, determines to destroy the whole of the smoking apparatus. The
  tray and lamp are dashed upon the floor, a few more moments will see
  the destruction of the pipe itself; but the noise has reached the
  ears of her lord, who rushes in, and, forgetful of all the teachings
  of his great master, Confucius, proceeds to belabour her with the
  bamboo stick he has seized for the purpose, in spite of the cries of
  their unfortunate child. The entrance of an old and faithful retainer
  alone prevents him from inflicting serious injury.

[Illustration]


  No. 7.

  Still lower sinks the opium victim in his miserable career. The
  comfort and shelter of his paternal home are now things of the past.
  A roof which, from the absence of tiles, can hardly be said to cover,
  with at one side some bamboo matting to screen from the blast, and a
  mat, arranged to form a shelter, covering the place where meals, when
  forthcoming, may be cooked, is all that now remains to him of home.
  Surely he will see his folly, and give up the practice which has
  wrought him such ruin? _He cannot._ The appetite is perpetuated and
  intensified by that upon which it feeds. Without medical aid it would
  now probably be impossible to give up the habit, and indulgence in it
  has taken away all desire for assistance.

[Illustration]


  No. 8.

  Not much better than the shed in which he lives by day, is the
  shelter in which he now spends the night. Somewhat screened by the
  garden fence, his bed, supported at one end on a pile of bricks,
  at the other on his only remaining stool, is still covered by his
  curtains, and his opium lamp is sufficiently sheltered to keep
  alight. Most of his clothes have gone to the pawnshop; ere long his
  curtains will follow them. His wife and child, the picture of misery,
  can only look with hopeless sorrow on the living and half-naked
  skeleton of the once portly and well-dressed gentleman. Wealth and
  property have gone, clothes and respectability have gone, home and
  health have gone, and what remains? Ah, what indeed! There is a
  ruined soul in that poor, heartless, wrecked body, almost beyond the
  possibility of salvation.

[Illustration]


  No. 9.

  The victim of opium is now a homeless beggar, squatting in some
  out-of-the-way corner, and dependent upon charity for a morsel of
  bread. His unshaven head well agrees with the general squalor of
  his appearance, and the ground is now his only bed and table. His
  sole remaining possessions are his opium-pipe and a few earthenware
  cooking utensils. Some compassionate person, perhaps a former
  farm-servant, is bringing him a small flattened loaf.

[Illustration]


  No. 10.

  Crime too often follows the destitution caused by opium-smoking;
  for _at all costs_ opium _must_ be had. Thefts, robberies, or even
  murders may result. The wretched culprit may have to flee from
  justice, or to make his escape from a neighbourhood which will no
  longer tolerate him. The very dogs pursue him. Probably the bucket
  in which the wanderer carries his pipe, and the labourer’s hat slung
  behind him, are both stolen. Some cave among the hills may shelter
  him, or the rocks may shield him from the cutting wind.

[Illustration]


  No. 11.

  The downward course of the opium-smoker is now very rapid. Exposure
  to the weather and want of food accelerate the injurious effects
  of the opium. No one would think of giving a night’s shelter to a
  man whose imperious craving for opium would compel him to rob his
  benefactor before morning. Endeavouring to warm himself in the
  sunshine, with unshaven head and haggard countenance, the sower
  coming with his seed-basket finds him in a sheltered corner of the
  field.

[Illustration]


  No. 12.

  Winter draws on apace. The fields supply nothing that the wretched
  opium-smoker can eat. All he can beg is insufficient to purchase
  that opium without which he could not exist for a single day; he has
  therefore exchanged his only shirt for a little opium, to quiet for
  a time what an opium-smoker well called “the torments of the hell
  within.” All power of enjoyment has long since passed away: now there
  is nothing before him but suffering--suffering beyond the grave!
  With trembling steps and a shivering frame he seeks the shelter of a
  cave among the rocks, in which he will lie down and _die_. Nor is he
  alone in his misery; thousands of similar victims are living, dying,
  dead--they are to be found everywhere.

[Illustration]




II.

OPIUM-SMOKING IN CHINA COMPARED WITH THE DRINKING HABITS OF ENGLAND.


On this point the evidence of Mr. (now Sir Thomas) Wade, K.C.B., Her
Majesty’s minister at the Court of Peking, given in Government Blue
Book, No. 5 (1871), p. 432, is so decisive, that it precludes the
necessity of further testimony. He says:--

“It is to me vain to think otherwise of the use of the drug in China,
than as of a habit many times more pernicious, nationally speaking,
than the gin and whisky drinking which we deplore at home. It takes
possession more insidiously, and keeps its hold to the full as
tenaciously. I know no case of radical cure. It has insured in every
case within my knowledge the steady descent, moral and physical, of the
smoker, and it is so far a greater mischief than drink, that it does
not, by external evidence of its effect, expose its victim to the loss
of repute which is the penalty of habitual drunkenness.”




III.

THE EXTENT OF OPIUM-SMOKING IN CHINA.


In the absence of an official census, we can only select the most
reliable evidence to be had on the subject.

J. Dudgeon, Esq., M.D., C.M., of the Peking Mission Hospital, estimates
that of the male population in China generally, probably 30 to 40 per
cent. smoke opium; of the general city population, 40 to 60 per cent.

The former of these statements is perhaps rather excessive, seeing
that the same authority gives the number of agriculturists and field
labourers as averaging only 4 to 6 per cent.

Of the city population we have from various quarters more minute
estimates to guide us.

Taking three important cities from various parts of the country, we
find that the number of opium-smokers does in each case exceed the
estimate given by Dr. Dudgeon.

  I.--Suchow, the capital of the province of Kiang Su. The Rev. C. H.
  Du Bose, a resident missionary, writes:--“As a minimum estimate,
  seven-tenths of the adult males smoke opium. To this fact all of the
  natives you ask will attest.”

  2.--Ningpo, a city of 400,000 inhabitants in the province of Chekiang.

  “It contains 2,700 opium-shops, or a shop for every 148 inhabitants,
  or every thirty men.”
                     (_v. Mander’s “Our Opium Trade with China,” p. 8._)

  3.--Tai Yuen, the capital of the province of Shansi. A resident
  missionary writes:--

  “It is estimated that six or seven out of every ten men you meet are
  addicted to the habit of opium-smoking, and a larger proportion of
  women than I have seen in any other city. There are about 400 retail
  opium-shops, and seventy or eighty wholesale dealers.”

It is probable that these cities exceed the average number of
opium-smokers throughout the city population in China; indeed, had not
the number been extraordinary, the estimate would probably not have
been made, but if the number be reduced by one-half, we have still 30
per cent. of the city population throughout China--in other words, some
tens of millions--who are the slaves of the opium-pipe.




IV.

ENGLAND’S RESPONSIBILITY IN REGARD TO THE CHINESE OPIUM-SMOKER.


Summary of facts bearing upon the relation of Great Britain to the
Chinese opium-trade:--

  1.--When China, as a nation, knew nothing of the vice of
  opium-smoking, British merchants introduced the drug, enriching the
  treasury of the East India Company to the demoralisation of the
  Chinese nation.

  2.--When the Chinese Government vigorously remonstrated and
  strenuously opposed, England carried the legalisation of the trade at
  the point of the sword.

  3.--When the Chinese, discomfited in the field, appealed to the
  generosity and humanity of the British Government for the suppression
  of the trade, the British Government continued and upheld the policy
  they had inaugurated by force of arms.

  4.--When the subject is brought before the Houses of Parliament,
  the trade is acknowledged to be unjustifiable, yet, because of
  the revenue it brings to the Indian empire, and the difficulties
  surrounding Indian finance, it is upheld by the Government and
  supported by the Opposition.


  HAZELL, WATSON, AND VINEY,
  PRINTERS,
  LONDON AND AYLESBURY.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Chinese Opium-Smoker, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHINESE OPIUM-SMOKER ***

***** This file should be named 58350-0.txt or 58350-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/3/5/58350/

Produced by deaurider, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

